Artificial intelligence in healthcare is the application of artificial intelligence (AI) to analyze and understand complex medical and healthcare data. In some cases, it can exceed or augment human capabilities by providing better or faster ways to diagnose, treat, or prevent disease.

As the widespread use of AI in healthcare is still relatively new, research is ongoing into its applications across various medical subdisciplines and related industries. AI programs are being applied to practices such as diagnostics, treatment protocol development, drug development, personalized medicine, and patient monitoring and care. Since radiographs are the most commonly performed imaging tests in radiology, the potential for AI to assist with triage and interpretation of radiographs is particularly significant.

Using AI also presents unprecedented ethical concerns related to issues such as data privacy, automation of jobs, and amplifying already existing biases. Furthermore, new technologies such as AI are often resisted by healthcare leaders, leading to slow and erratic adoption. In contrast, there are also several cases where AI has been put to use in healthcare without proper testing. A systematic review and thematic analysis in 2023 showed that most stakeholders including health professionals, patients, and the general public doubted that care involving AI could be empathetic. Moreover, meta-studies have found that the scientific literature on AI in healthcare often suffers from a lack of reproducibility.

Applications in healthcare systems
Disease diagnosis
Accurate and early diagnosis of diseases is still a challenge in healthcare. Recognizing medical conditions and their symptoms is a complex problem. AI can assist clinicians with its data processing capabilities to save time and improve accuracy. Through the use of machine learning, artificial intelligence can be able to substantially aid doctors in patient diagnosis through the analysis of mass electronic health records (EHRs). AI can help early prediction, for example, of Alzheimer's disease and dementias, by looking through large numbers of similar cases and possible treatments.

Doctors' decision making could also be supported by AI in urgent situations, for example in the emergency department. Here AI algorithms can help prioritize more serious cases and reduce waiting time. Decision support systems augmented with AI can offer real-time suggestions and faster data interpretation to aid the decisions made by healthcare professionals.

In 2023 a study reported higher satisfaction rates with ChatGPT-generated responses compared with those from physicians for medical questions posted on Reddit's r/AskDocs. Evaluators preferred ChatGPT's responses to physician responses in 78.6% of 585 evaluations, noting better quality and empathy. The authors noted that these were isolated questions taken from an online forum, not in the context of an established patient-physician relationship.Moreover, responses were not graded on the accuracy of medical information, and some have argued that the experiment was not properly blinded, with the evaluators being coauthors of the study.

Recent developments in statistical physics, machine learning, and inference algorithms are also being explored for their potential in improving medical diagnostic approaches.Also, the establishment of large healthcare-related data warehouses of sometimes hundreds of millions of patients provides extensive training data for AI models.